“You’re pining for a daddy you didn’t even know, like some sniveling bastard,” Robert Pattinson’s Antinous tells Tom Holland’s Telemachus in the new trailer for Christopher Nolan’s _The Odyssey_. The intimate anachronism of the dialogue and Pattinson’s conniving, bullying tone feel like a big departure in a period epic, but it’s the accents in the scene that have caught most people’s attention. Pattinson and Holland, both English actors, are instead speaking with American accents. So is everyone else in the trailer, Matt Damon’s Odysseus included.

It’s a choice, no doubt, and one that’s already receiving some small online backlash in anticipation of the film’s release date, July 17. The thinking goes that period epics, in all their stoicism, demand the historic, regal sound of an English accent. The film is an adaptation of an Ancient Greek myth, but nobody expects Nolan to pull a Mel Gibson and revive a dead language onscreen for accuracy, as Gibson did with Aramaic in _The Passion of the Christ_ or the indigenous Yucatec Mayan language in _Apocalypto_. No, what people are upset about is the _feel_ of the thing. Period epics and British accents go hand-in-hand in the minds of many moviegoers, and breaking with that tradition is a major faux pas.

The trouble is, period epics have always had a more mixed approach to accents than people remember. More modern films like _Gladiator_ may have had actors like Joaquin Phoenix throwing on less-than-convincing English accents to appease accepted style, but take a stroll back to the epics of old, like _Ben-Hur_ and _The Ten Commandments_, and the notion that historical drama requires accents from across the pond begins to evaporate. Charlton Heston may have affected a Mid-Atlantic accent throughout his acting career, but his voice is still distinctly American, as are numerous other accents in those films. While 1953’s original CinemaScope epic _The Robe_ might’ve had everyone putting on British accents, major films like Stanley Kubrick’s _Spartacus_ defiantly featured American accents. Indeed, for his turn making an ancient epic, Kubrick made differing accents part of the thematic texture, casting the Romans mostly with British actors, and their slaves with Americans, and having each use their natural speech. It’s a method George Lucas would later pick up in _Star Wars_—does “A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away” make it a period epic, too?—by casting mostly Brits as ranking Imperial officers, while his scrappy heroes were largely American.

Kubrick himself had employed the practice previously, on 1957’s _Paths of Glory_, a military drama about the French in World War I. Despite all playing Frenchmen, the higher-up characters in the film—the officers and generals who give the orders—are mostly played by Brits, while star Kirk Douglas and his lowly soldiers are played by Americans, accents and all. In these films, accent becomes a signifier of class. For moviegoers at the time, none of this would have been unusual. Hollywood had always played fast and loose with accents, often not bothering with them at all. Plenty of comedies and dramas were set in foreign countries, with actors mostly using their natural accents. In Ernst Lubitsch’s 1940 classic _The Shop Around the Corner_, any given scene features five or six different accents, from Midwestern, to Mid-Atlantic, to Austrian, to whatever Jimmy Stewart’s accent was, and all of them playing Hungarians in a story set in Budapest. No audience at the time would have batted an eye.

Over time, as films have become more naturalistic, allowances for incorrect accents have been harder to come by. Still, it’s questionable whether adhering to appropriate accents, even when the movie is entirely in English, has ever really mattered. Surely there are people out there who complain about Sean Connery using his iconic Scottish brogue to play a Soviet submarine captain in _The Hunt for Red October_, but they’d be in the minority, and rightly so. It’s the performance that matters, not the accent. When Martin Scorsese set out to finally film his masterful adaptation of _The Last Temptation of Christ_, he also let his actors keep their accent. Willem Dafoe playing Jesus simply sounds like Willem Dafoe, and Harvey Keitel plays Judas in full New Yorker mode. If anything, because they haven’t bothered to attempt accents, the lack of artifice in their performances makes Scorsese’s humanistic vision of the Biblical story feel startlingly intimate.

This seems to have been the guiding principle for Ridley Scott lately. While earlier Scott epics like _Gladiator_ or 2005’s _Kingdom of Heaven_ went heavy on the English accents, recent films like _The Last Duel_ and _Gladiator 2_ haven’t bothered as much. In both films, Scott allowed his actors the space to do whatever they wanted accent-wise. In _Gladiator 2_, the Irish actor Paul Mescal goes a bit British, while Denzel Washington mostly sounds like Denzel Washington with a bit of Shakespearean flair in his delivery. For _The Last Duel_, Scott’s France-set medieval drama and another Damon picture, the accents were even more all over the place, prompting questions. “In _The Last Duel_, there’s no French accent. That would’ve been a disaster, and yet, it’s all French. Who cares? Like, shut the fuck up, then you’ll enjoy the movie,” Scott told _Deadline_ in 2021.

Nolan, as yet, hasn’t addressed the accents in _The Odyssey_, and it’s doubtful he’ll tell anyone to “shut the fuck up” about it, but his approach in the film is still a departure from previous norms. Instead of sticking to the tried and true English accent, or creating a thematic scheme for accent work as Kubrick did, or even throwing caution to the wind like Scott, Nolan has chosen to go all-American. Without seeing the film in full, it’s impossible to judge the creative choice, but even from the trailer it’s not hard to surmise the intention. For all the incredible scale Nolan has conjured in his $250 million epic, he’s always been a director interested in more intimate, grounded drama. British accents in these kinds of movies are usually meant to elevate the storytelling, to make epic stories that feel closer to the gods. Not unlike George Lucas’s scrappy heroes, it seems Nolan is after a more relatable humanity in his mythic tale. And in Hollywood, there’s nothing more relatable than an American accent. Like apple pie.
