_“When you enter the water, something like metamorphosis happens. Leaving behind the land, you go through the looking-glass surface and enter a new world....”_ —Roger Deakin on swimming

1. _**WELCOME TO THE DOPE SHOW**_

The bodies of male Olympic swimmers tend to differ from those of mere mortals in a few key areas. One: Large hands, which make it easier to catch the water. Two: Long arms, to pull more water with each stroke. And three: Swimmers are often tall—especially sprinters, for whom six one to six five seems to be a sweet spot—with broad shoulders and long, lithe torsos forming an inverted triangle, what many people consider the platonic swimmer’s build. This triangle then resolves, fractal-like, into an even tinier visual triangle cut, generally, from polyester and spandex: an immodest piece of clothing commonly referred to as a Speedo. Olympic swimmers usually look a little better than the rest of us in a Speedo.

Those differences were strikingly apparent on a sunny afternoon in Las Vegas last October, when a handful of Olympic-level athletes slipped into their little triangles and hopped into the pool at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, for a hard day of training. Elsewhere on campus, students speed-walked to class wearing pajamas, but here, inside UNLV’s natatorium, Lil Wayne’s “Lollipop” was ricocheting off the rafters from a Bluetooth speaker. The stench of chlorine gave the air a faintly antiseptic quality, like something was being purged.

The athletes had flown in from all over the world to be there. Among them were Marius Kusch from Germany (a gold medalist at the European Championships and bronze medalist at the World Championships), Kristian Gkolomeev from Greece (who, until recently, had swum the fastest-ever 50-meter freestyle), Andrii Govorov from Ukraine (current world record holder in the 50-meter butterfly), and Ben Proud of the United Kingdom, a multiple-time world champion and the 2024 Olympic silver medalist in the 50-meter freestyle. In sum, an exquisite assemblage of torsos that would rival the Greek and Roman sculpture galleries at the Met. There was a lone woman in the pool: Megan Romano, from the distant kingdom of Florida, swimming briskly in the far lane. She was reacclimating her body to the water after having retired nine years earlier and living here in Las Vegas with her girlfriend, a beauty influencer, and, in Romano’s telling, often partying.

It’s a rarity for Olympic-level athletes from different countries to gather in one place and train together. _Inspiring_ is maybe the wrong word, but the concentration of talent was high-voltage. They were charging hard, pushing one another in a mock-playful way that did little to mask the competitive intensity seeping out of their pores. “Everyone is well-intentioned, but also everyone’s an athlete. All athletes have this ego in them that makes them want to be the best,” Proud would later tell me. “It comes out in different ways. When you put eight guys together—each with an ego that says that they’re the best swimmer in the world—the dynamic will be quite bizarre. Everyone wants to be the alpha.”

The alphas had descended on the desert to begin their first training camp for the Enhanced Games, the premise of which is: What if we took world-class athletes from a few sports (swimming, track, and weightlifting, e.g.) and permitted them to optimize their bodies with performance-enhancing drugs under medical supervision to compete against one another as they attempted to shatter world records? In other words, something like an Olympics with _juice._ And the top prize for breaking a world record? $1 million, cash.

While the idea of a “steroid Olympics” sounds like the kind of thing that gets hatched late at night in the stony haze of college dorm rooms, the Enhanced Games is very real and very serious and was commenced a few years ago by a 41-year-old entrepreneur and lawyer by training named Aron D’Souza. If that name sounds even a little familiar, it might be because D’Souza helped facilitate Peter Thiel’s financing of the lawsuit that, in 2016, brought down the gossip website _Gawker,_ which had previously outed Thiel as gay.

D’Souza is a gay man himself, and in Enhanced’s early days he often invoked LGBTQ-activist-adjacent language to frame his moral argument for its existence. The Games are fundamentally about pursuing scientific innovation and bodily autonomy, he has argued—but they’re also a zeitgeisty attempt to market the idea of enhancement and then sell drugs to the masses. Libertarian techno-utopianism, but make it sexy.

An attempt to understand who would agree to this experiment in the first place is one reason why I was there poolside as athletes prepared their bodies for the rigors of enhancement, which would require them to relocate to Abu Dhabi a few months later, all before the actual competition in a purpose-built complex at the Resorts World Las Vegas casino on May 24. In the United Arab Emirates, they would take part in a clinical study—sponsored by Enhanced but led by an independent group of researchers and physicians—at a specialized hospital, where their health would be closely monitored. Through consultations with doctors performing a battery of baseline tests, the athletes would build what Enhanced calls a “protocol”: a personally tailored regimen drawn from a select list of FDA-approved performance-enhancing substances. Things like anabolic steroids and other compounds mostly known by their acronyms: HGH, EPO, etc.

Part small-scale Olympiad, part enhancement exhibition, part scientific inquiry: The Enhanced Games certainly embody a lot of what’s in the air right now, especially in terms of longevity and what might be around the corner of the current wellness boom. Whether Enhanced could actually pull off this extravaganza or if it would end up being some sort of biohacky fiasco is the question I kept returning to over the course of this past year.

That morning’s workout, designed by head coach Brett Hawke (he brings to mind a swim-world Phil Jackson; zen, lots of championship hardware), was all about building speed and power with resistance workouts. The athletes hooked themselves up to cables and pulleys integrated into heavy machinery on land, before swimming all-out in the other direction, like bluefins dragging a Bayliner. A few emerged from the water looking like they were going to hurl. (I’m told this is a semi-regular occurrence at these kinds of practices.)

Keeping watch over this high-level scrimmage was a UNLV lifeguard: a shy, mop-haired college student who looked at least a full head shorter than the Olympians. The sight of him there in the chair clutching a floatie made for a funny visual dissonance, as if Frodo were tasked with minding the Avengers.

I sidled up to Frodo as we watched the athletes train. He told me that he was on UNLV’s swim team, and it was more than a little trippy that his favorite swimmer, Ben Proud, was here, like actually here, in the same pool that he practiced in.

“When I saw him swimming, I was like: _Damn, that’s beautiful_,” said Frodo, as we admired Proud’s freestyle stroke. The way his arms gracefully extend out of the water is one of those sublime sports motions, smooth and almost Fibonacci-like in how the movement traces the air as if by a law of nature, its beauty as legible as Griffey’s swing or Curry’s jumper.

Proud, 31, is the swimmer closest to the peak of the sport to have signed with Enhanced, and, therefore, arguably had the most to lose; juicing could risk his ability to compete in traditional swimming competitions, including the Olympics, ever again. His face is handsome and all severe angles, with a muscular neck that’s thicker than the width of his head. Should he wander into a livestream, he could easily frame-mog just about any lost soul, except Proud is brainier and more introverted than your standard-issue jock. For example: He reads books. (_Meditations_ by Marcus Aurelius was sitting on a table in his hotel room during one of our many interviews; a few months later it was _Principles_ by Ray Dalio.)

There’s a pretense-free, worldly awareness to him that he attributes to growing up abroad in Malaysia, where his parents relocated when he was young. His mom was an artist, while his dad had an interior design business. “Out there, being a part of the water culture is just a way of life,” said Proud. “My parents had me swimming before my second birthday.”

On the topic of his swimming form, which has admirers all over Swimming TikTok, Proud attributes its grace to an almost Taoist mindset that has evolved over time—“a balance of masculine and feminine” or “yin and yang.”

“I’m not the most manly man,” he said, “but everything’s a spectrum. In swimming, it’s all about: How do you combine elegance in the water with power and speed? Everything has its polar opposite. You have to be flexible, but strong. You have to be aggressive, but also really gentle. And I guess I’ve learned to just be soft with the water and not attack it.”

Sophisticated, thoughtful, charming, with shoulders like He-Man: Ben Proud is, at least to my mind, kind of a strange candidate for pharmaceutical enhancement. Even his name can evoke righteous notions of good and justice, not someone who might take shortcuts or volunteer his hard-won body for the unknown.

I asked the lifeguard how he felt about his idol’s participation in something like the Enhanced Games: his perceived heel turn, his journey through the looking glass. “I don’t know….” Frodo said almost inaudibly. The tension for him was the same one I’d been wrestling with: What are we supposed to do with this new category of superathlete? Once you go enhanced, can you _really_ say you’re the fastest swimmer in history? “I’m just like, uh, I don’t think so,” Frodo said.

_**2\. GOOD DRUGS AND BAD DRUGS**_

I’m not entirely sure where the human impulse to put weird shit in our bodies in the name of self-advancement came from, but performance-enhancing drug use has been present in athletic competition since basically forever. There’s evidence that Olympians in ancient Greece ingested a number of substances in search of enhancement, including hallucinogenic mushrooms. The winner of the third Olympic marathon, held in St. Louis in 1904, crossed the finish line with the aid of a cocktail that included brandy and strychnine, a neurotoxin that triggers muscle contractions but today is mainly used in rat poison. (Of the 32 competitors, only 14 finished; it was hot and there was only one water station, at mile 12.)

As the years went on, athletes were able to utilize more-sophisticated drugs with clearer performance-enhancing properties. The use of amphetamines and anabolic steroids spread through sports by the middle of the century, exacerbated by competitions like the Olympics increasingly turning into a Cold War proxy. By the ’60s, the East Germans started a covert doping program that ran until the fall of the Berlin Wall. Thousands of athletes of both genders, some of whom were minors, were administered PEDs, most frequently an anabolic steroid in tablet form. Information about the substances, either the potential side-effects or even the identity of the compounds, was often withheld from athletes. This Faustian experiment led East Germany to punch above its weight for years. At the 1976 Summer Olympics, for example, the nation of about 17 million won 40 gold medals. West Germany, with 61 million, only won 10. But many of the athletes-slash-unwitting-guinea pigs developed crippling health problems they’ve attributed to the program: heart and liver issues, miscarriages, depression, and infertility among them.

Meanwhile, in the background, a nascent anti-doping establishment had started to cohere, one that can be traced to the death of a Danish cyclist named Knud Jensen. On August 26, 1960, at the Olympic team trials in Rome, Jensen collapsed mid-race, hitting his head on the pavement, and later died. At the time, it was intimated that PED use had played a role, but it was never proven. (A postmortem was said to have blamed heat stroke; it was over 104 degrees Fahrenheit that day.) Nevertheless, the incident placed mounting pressure on the International Olympic Committee to confront doping, culminating in the body’s creation of a medical commission in 1967. For the first time, the IOC would publish a list of banned substances and institute drug testing.

In the following decades, the IOC’s anti-doping policies were viewed as something of an international benchmark, but they only regulated the Olympics. Globally, doping control was a patchwork system, overseen by various sports federations and national governments. And even still, critics wondered just how effective the Olympics were in monitoring and deterring PED use. By the early ’90s, major scandals—like the unveiling of the East German program and, most notably, Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson’s failing a steroid test after breaking the 100-meter world record at the 1988 Seoul Games—had rocked public perception of doping controls.

The dam finally broke with the 1998 Tour de France. A Festina team _soigneur,_ Willy Voet, was stopped by French customs officials and discovered to have some 400 vials and capsules of PEDs in his car, including human growth hormone and testosterone. “It was sort of one of these open secrets within the sport that everybody was doing it, only now the police were involved,” April Henning, a sociologist and the co-author of _Doping: A Sporting History,_ told me. “As a result of this, every other country in the world said we _do not_ want to be in the position that France is in, so the IOC needs to do something.”

In the wake of the Festina affair, the IOC convened a conference in Switzerland that gave birth to the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA). It was positioned as an independent governing body—funded half by the IOC and half by the participating nations—that would regulate and synchronize anti-doping policy. Today, there are about 750 sporting organizations, ranging from FIFA to the International Jump Rope Union, that adhere to the standards laid out in WADA’s World-Anti Doping Code, a sort of PED-control constitution.

Digging into those standards can feel like accidentally wandering into a freshman philosophy seminar. How do you even decide which drugs are worth banning? According to WADA, first you have to stand about a million miles back and ask: What even is the purpose of sports, anyway? The agency’s answer: It’s the virtues embedded within sports—that when people dedicate themselves to perfecting their naturally given talents to compete, it epitomizes something fundamental about the best of humanity. WADA calls this “the spirit of sport,” and it underpins all of its policies.

Ultimately, in order for a substance to make WADA’s prohibited list, it has to tick at least two of three boxes: (1) It “enhances sport performance” or has the potential to, (2) it poses an actual or potential health risk to the athlete, and/or (3) it violates “the spirit of sport.”

Now, try applying these standards to the endless number of substances that people can put on or in their bodies. Take caffeine. It’s a fairly powerful stimulant that can actually boost endurance and energy, but is it worth prohibiting? WADA started allowing caffeine without limitation in 2004, after the IOC and other governing bodies had restricted its use in previous decades. (An American sprinter named Inger Miller was actually stripped of her bronze medal from the 1999 World Indoor Championships after a test determined that she had surpassed the urine concentration threshold, which was 12 micrograms per milliliter, the equivalent of a whole lot of coffee. America Runs on Dunkin’.) Or what about beta-2 agonists, a class of drugs used in asthma inhalers that relax the airways and make it easier to breathe. They’re banned, but with exceptions. An athlete with a condition that requires a medication on the prohibited list can apply for a “Therapeutic Use Exemption” with information supplied by their doctor. And a few types of beta-2 agonists can be taken up to certain dosage thresholds even without an exemption.

This is just to say: Building a list of banned substances isn’t like making an ins-and-outs list and screenshotting it for the grid. Sure, you have to rely on scientific and medical expertise, but it’s ultimately grounded in stances on ethics. What if you’re Enhanced and you want to build a different type of sport with its own ethos?

First of all, the athletes have to volunteer to enhance—it’s not even a prerequisite for participating. (A small fraction in the first Games plan on competing without PEDs. Best of luck to them.) All athletes who choose to enhance have to do so under a doctor’s supervision, using only legal substances. Though athletes can enhance independently, finding their own doctor and building a protocol at their own cost, the vast majority are doing it this first go-round through the clinical study Enhanced is sponsoring.

Athletes participating in the study will have a select number of performance-enhancing drugs on the table to choose from: a few types of anabolic steroids (including some testosterone compounds typically used in testosterone replacement therapy), stimulants (modafinil and Adderall), human growth hormone (obvious), meldonium (a “metabolic modulator” that can help with energy and recovery), darbepoetin and erythropoietin (which help with red blood cell production for endurance; erythropoietin is one of the substances Lance Armstrong admitted to using), and estradiol and progesterone (hormone therapy for women). As for the specific substances and dosages that any individual is taking, Enhanced doesn’t disclose this information. This is partly due to confidentiality requirements of the clinical study, partly due to the customized nature of the protocols—organizers don’t want people to copy a regimen that was medically tailored to someone else.

So how did some enhancements make the cut and others not? I, for one, was shocked to see that the peptides plastered over all our feeds were off the table. The answer, at least partly, can be found in input from the independent medical and scientific commissions, advisory groups that Enhanced established to help build the study’s parameters and ensure safety. Guido Pieles, a sports cardiologist and honorary associate professor at University College London, heads up the medical commission. He explained that peptides were where “Enhanced and we, as scientific and medical commissions, draw the line. We will not use them because not enough data has been put out there to say that they’re really safe.”

But what about the risks?! Brother (gender-neutral term), the risks are real. Enhanced has comprehensive baseline assessments, medical monitoring, and structured long-term follow-ups in place to safeguard its athletes, but PED use has been associated with everything from heart disease to infertility to kidney failure. Then there’s possible mood and behavior effects. We’ve all heard about roid rage, megadoses of anabolic steroids appearing to fill the heads of even perfectly well-meaning dudes with fucked-up intentions. Mike Israetel, a popular fitness YouTuber who has publicly documented his steroid dalliances, recalled a personal experience. He was in a jiujitsu class while juicing for an upcoming bodybuilding show, rolling with other students during a drill: “I had passed somebody’s guard in the _gi_ and went knee-on-belly. And my first thought was, Oh, I should reach down and rip open his rib cage.”

The thing is, a lot of what we know about the potential health impacts of PEDs comes with all sorts of caveats (Mortal Kombat fatality roid rage visions included). Researchers are often forced to look retroactively at people who’ve abused massive doses from dubious sources without a doctor’s input in uncontrolled environments—not exactly the sort of data scientists love. In this way, the study that Enhanced is sponsoring has the potential to help build our knowledge of what this stuff does and how safe it might be. The competition, then, isn’t the juicing free-for-all you might have imagined it was. Parts are maybe even a little boring and academic, like something you’d scroll through while reading PubMed.

**3\. THE ALLURE OF ENHANCEMENT**

Last year, on a cold Valentine’s Day morning, I was invited to an anonymous penthouse on the East Side of Manhattan to first meet Aron D’Souza. I rode a gilded elevator up to a suite with awesome views of the city, where a coterie of tall, beautiful men guided me to a long table. One of them told me he was on TRT; he looked like he was in his mid-30s but was actually closer to 50. When D’Souza emerged from the kitchen, the first thing I noticed was his skin. It was so immaculately poreless it looked baddie filtered. He was in good spirits. Just the day before, Enhanced had announced that 1789 Capital, the investment firm at which Donald Trump Jr. is a partner, co-led a multimillion-dollar funding round.

I was there to talk about the possibility of writing something about what Enhanced was building, and D’Souza wanted to feel me out. In Enhanced’s early days, D’Souza had a distinct approach in messaging the brand, apparently born out of the company’s initial experience with raising funds. D’Souza first developed the Enhanced Games concept at the end of 2022 and, as one early employee would later tell the _Financial Times,_ it was initially met with resistance by investors—there was interest, but also concern about associating with such a norm-breaking idea. It inspired a strategy, the employee said: “We decided we had to win the culture battle first.”

D’Souza made the rounds in the press, honing a pitch laced with contrarianism. He challenged commonly held beliefs—about fairness in sports, about individual freedoms, about human betterment through science—in a brainy, provocative style that could feel equal parts debate-team captain and start-up founder. (In person, D’Souza maintained blink-less eye contact and spoke in complete paragraphs.) The Enhanced Games wasn’t merely an out-there sports-and-entertainment venture, it was something far grander. “We’re building the Apollo mission for the 21st century,” D’Souza said when he and Christian Angermayer, a major investor in Enhanced and one of the company’s cofounders, appeared on _The Joe Rogan Experience._ “What did the Apollo mission do? It showed us that we were so much more capable as a human species, right? We hit a new threshold, going to the moon using science and technology to overcome our limits. This is exactly what the Enhanced Games is about.”

The concept courted controversy at times, but ultimately it generated attention. And the company built a base of investor support that would eventually grow to include, in addition to Angermayer and 1789 Capital, Thiel, Balaji Srinivasan, Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss, and Saudi Prince Khaled bin Alwaleed bin Talal Al Saud.

Permitting PEDs in sports, of course, isn’t an idea that started with D’Souza. One of the major inspirations he’s cited is an academic paper published in 2004 titled “Why We Should Allow Performance Enhancing Drugs in Sport.” The lead author, an Australian bioethicist named Julian Savulescu, told me he first got interested in probing the philosophy of doping around the time of the Sydney Olympics. The paper’s arguments would be familiar to anyone who followed Enhanced’s early bullet points: We try to police PEDs, but plenty of athletes use them anyway; sport, in its natural state, is actually unfair, favoring winners of a “genetic lottery”—enhancements might hypothetically give you a chance to score a point in a game of one-on-one against Victor Wembanyama.

But its most interesting point comes in an interrogation of “the spirit of sport,” and here the paper arrives at a different ethical conclusion than WADA has: Allowing enhancements would actually make sports a more faithful representation of the human spirit, not just a test of one’s biological potential. “Performance enhancement is a part of the human condition,” Savulescu told me. “To be human is to try to be better.”

This idea—that there’s a more universal desire at play, one not just limited to Olympians—is the type of insight Enhanced has been building toward. This February, the company launched Live Enhanced, a direct-to-consumer platform for over-the-counter supplements and prescription protocols for the rest of us. Interested in TRT, GLP-1s, trendy peptides? Enhanced can connect you to a telehealth clinician for a virtual consult to see what could be right for you.

Cards on the table, I am what you might call a potential high-value customer in an investor pitch deck: a washed millennial dad and quasi–gym bro whose 41-year-old body does a remarkable job of inventing new aches and pains on a weekly basis. I would not mind being prescribed something that I thought could make me feel a few years younger. I’m sure I’m not the only one.

There’s a market opportunity here it seems; so much so that Enhanced has made this direct-to-consumer element the emphasis of its business model. Late last year, Enhanced announced it had entered into an agreement to take this consumer-product-oriented vision of the company public through a SPAC merger. The deal valued the enterprise at $1.2 billion. Around the time of the merger reveal, the company also announced that D’Souza had “transitioned out of the company’s day-to-day operations, while remaining a shareholder,” and that Maximilian Martin, one of the cofounders, had been appointed CEO.

D’Souza—who’s building a new company called Objection, an AI-powered platform for evaluating claims made in the media—told me this succession was the plan all along. “I’ve always been a founder my whole life. I’m not into management,” he said. “And I’m also not that young anymore. I’m 41 years old, and Max is, like, 30. To be the CEO of an NYSE, billion-dollar company at 30 years old, that’s a big responsibility. It’s also a really bloody hard job: the travel, the endless demands. Like, it’s not easy.”

_But isn’t that what enhancements are for?_ I suggested

He laughed. “Founder and CEO is definitely a young person’s game.”

Going forward, the Enhanced Games would still be an essential part of the company, but the pitch Martin gave me was a little more restrained. They weren’t like going to the moon, exactly, but were something that would work in tandem with the consumer business—generating revenues on their own and driving demand to Live Enhanced. “If you look at other people in the \[direct-to-consumer\] space, they’re paying up to $16 million for Super Bowl ads to get in front of sports people,” Martin told me. But what if you owned the Super Bowl and the whole thing was one giant ad for your products? “Sports becomes an amplification tool, an advertising tool, but it doesn’t cost us money; it actually makes us money.”

Back in Las Vegas, when I was seated on the sidelines, it was easy for me to see why swimming was such a good fit for Enhanced: In their natural state of clotheslessness, swimmers were ideal billboards for a company that wanted to sell the masses on the potential benefits of enhancement.

To that end, Enhanced hopes to get as many eyes on the Games as possible, through a number of methods. They’ll be livestreamed internationally on YouTube, and behind-the-scenes coverage of the athletes’ prep area will be featured on a new platform called Zoop that was cofounded by the guy who started OnlyFans. Plus, it’ll all be chopped into clips for TikTok, Instagram, and the like. This is partly why Enhanced decided to feature sprint sports: to meet attention-strained modern media consumption where it lives.

Martin told me he thinks about athletes as kind of like high-end race cars, and the scientists they work with are mechanical engineers fiddling with the human body’s tuning. “Elite athletes are genetically blessed—like, look at these guys, they’re just genetically different from us,” Martin said. “The work that Formula 1 engineers do is at the forefront of scientific innovation, and that technology”—paddle shifters, for example—“is going to trickle into road-car production down the line.”

Martin’s hope is that Enhanced’s work with athletes will help “improve our understanding on the impacts of performance enhancements and how we can regulate and scale it down on a broader level to the average Joes like myself.” At a sprightly 29, Martin said that he’s already on a testosterone protocol and feels awesome. “A byproduct of taking testosterone is that it takes down your fertility,” he told me giddily. “I’m not at a point in my life where I want to have kids, so actually taking down my fertility is a great thing because it offers \[similar\] benefits as if my girlfriend was taking the contraceptive pill, which is a humongous disturbance of her hormones, et cetera. And me, as a guy, I can actually take testosterone and feel like a superhero!”

_**4\. THE FIRST MAN**_

Irvine is a quiet and anodyne university town in Southern California, dotted on the map with boba shops and poke bowl counters, with an abundance of confusing streets that snake into cul-de-sacs, the kind of unwalkable suburb that would give Jane Jacobs a migraine. It’s here where James Magnussen, a retired Australian swimmer who, in 2024, became the first athlete to sign on with Enhanced, found himself training while undergoing enhancement.

Magnussen, now 35, already had some Olympic hardware in his collection, including a silver in the 100-meter freestyle. The Enhanced team reached out to him after he mentioned on a podcast that he’d be interested in being a guinea pig for a million-dollar shot at breaking the 50-meter freestyle world record. In October of 2024, he moved to Irvine to begin training with coach Brett Hawke for a one-off time trial ahead of the first Games. Only the local aquatics center reportedly didn’t want him to train there, so Magnussen resorted to mostly practicing outdoors in the community pool of Hawke’s apartment complex. “It was pretty weird,” Magnussen told me. “People would kind of stop and look as they were walking their dogs.”

Magnussen soon began an adventurous enhancement protocol that, he told _The Sydney Morning Herald_, incorporated various peptides (which, again, athletes participating in the study won’t have on their menus; Magnussen was working with his own physician at the time). He was taking BPC-157 and thymosin (a.k.a. the Wolverine stack) for healing and muscle recovery, and CJC-1295 and ipamorelin for stimulating HGH production. But Magnussen’s favorite enhancement, he said, was probably good old-fashioned testosterone, which makes you bigger and stronger. “It does what it says on the label,” said Magnussen.

Magnussen was self-administering enhancements, so he watched a few YouTube videos in order to figure out the least-painful way to inject himself. Some mornings, he’d have to give himself three shots, some mornings one, other mornings, none. The subcutaneous injections, which can go in a pinch of belly fat or in the thigh, Magnussen described as “dipping your toe”: The needle is thin and about as long as a fingernail. The intramuscular needle commonly used for T? Well, that was a different story.

Typically, this requires two needles: one to draw the testosterone up from the vial, and then another needle to actually slide down into the muscle for the delivery; this two-needle technique is standard practice and helps keep the injection needle nice and sharp.

The intramuscular needle is “quite long,” said Magnussen, typically an inch to an inch and a half, given that it has to go “through the skin, through the fat, and then into the muscle.” To ensure he was going deep enough, Magnussen said he would sit his body weight down onto the poke.

At first it was uncomfortable, but the injections quickly became part of Magnussen’s routine. “Rise and shine and jab yourself in the butt,” he said with a grin. For Magnussen, enhancement had obvious effects on his strength and muscle mass, but its impact on recovery was pronounced too. He felt like he could train harder with minimal rest, squeezing in more reps. Reality folded into itself like a Hyperbolic Time Chamber.

It’s why for seven days a week, seven weeks straight, Magnussen spent up to two hours in the pool in the morning, and then hit the gym for weights in the afternoon. He put on 40 pounds of muscle, peaking at a Hulk-like 250 pounds. He was smashing PRs in the weight room and felt fucking unstoppable. “Brett would say to me, ‘How do you feel today? Do we need to have a lighter day?’ And every day I’d be like, ‘No, let’s go again!’ ”

“I’d wake up the next day with no soreness, no tiredness,” he added. “All my metrics went back to normal. My resting heart rate, my heart rate variability, everything said that I was ready to go.”

February 25, 2025: the time trial, a big day for Enhanced. That day, in Greensboro, North Carolina, with a documentary crew filming, Magnussen would attempt to break the 50-meter freestyle record. He slipped into a polyurethane supersuit—officially banned by swimming’s governing body in 2010 as a tech enhancement—and prepared for his million-dollar sprint across the pool.

The time he needed to beat was 20.91 seconds.

Magnussen exploded off the block and into the pool, kicking up a fury of whitewater. The raw power of the thrash was almost cartoonish, Taz ensconced in a whirlwind.

But: He failed. His fastest time that day, after multiple attempts, was 22.73. Well under the world record. What the hell happened?

“What we didn’t take into account was that you aren’t taking performance enhancements for your nervous system. So your muscles are recovering, the tissue’s recovering, and mentally you feel motivated, but slowly you’re beating down your central nervous system,” Magnussen said. “And by the time I got to Greensboro to race, I had completely fatigued that aspect. My body stopped firing in the way I needed it to to race quickly. I wasn’t getting those messages from my brain to my muscles.” Ballooning up to the size of a linebacker probably did not help Magnussen’s chances. Nevertheless, early returns from his experience with that initial protocol was information to build on.

A couple months after Magnussen landed in Irvine, Kristian Gkolomeev signed on with Enhanced to join the push for a WR swim at the time trial. By then, Hawke knew to incorporate more rest into the training program. As Gkolomeev developed his stack with his doctor, he wound up taking what he’s described as “baby doses.”

Gkolomeev is nearly six feet eight, with narrower shoulders than Magnussen’s and an enviably small head. When his arms are stretched overhead, he takes on the elongated silhouette of a barracuda. That same February day, Gkolomeev ended up breaking the world record in the same pool, clocking in with an official time of 20.89. Under his conservative doping regimen, he became the first recipient of Enhanced’s million-dollar check.

That ruthlessly efficient, iterative approach seems like it’s at the heart of what Enhanced is trying to build, that very Silicon Valley idea that failures are just lessons on the moneyed road of progress.

**5\. INTO THE DESERT**

Abu Dhabi, early 2026.

Erth is a sprawling, five-star luxury resort situated on the southeastern corner of Abu Dhabi’s main island and replete with sports facilities, making it ideal for professional athletes. Everything is oxidized beige. When you zoom out on Google Maps, the fortified architecture might as well be a spaceport on Arrakis.

Inside, however, it’s gym-bro heaven: Rogue-hardware-everything; rows of Theraguns; an Olympic-size swimming pool; padel courts; a buffet-style cafeteria, where the food is not only macro-friendly but a legit culinary destination, where wealthy-looking locals gather to break their fast during Ramadan. When I visited in February, a Russian football club was living and training on the premises, as well as about 40 athletes from Enhanced, including the more recently signed track athletes and weightlifters. The latter were easy to spot in the cafeteria. They were shorter and were often juggling multiple plates.

The swimmers all signed up for this for their own reasons, but many wanted to avenge past failures. Then there was Megan Romano, who said she wanted to see if she could get close to where she was in her 20s again. Andrii Govorov, meanwhile, signed up with Enhanced partly out of necessity.

When Russia invaded his country, Ukraine, his business there was destroyed. Govorov was a star back home before the war, someone with sponsorships and connections. But ever since, he’s had to become a sort of athlete-nomad, heading where his training leads him: Germany, Hawaii, Spain, Portugal. His growing family (his wife recently gave birth to their second child) is taking up residence in Poland for the time being. He sees his deal with Enhanced as an opportunity to be part of something exciting and new, sure, but there’s a part of him that also sees it as a steadying force for his career.

“I’ve had no stable coach, I had no stable place to train; always moving around, changing places,” Govorov told me. “So in order to be able to perform, I needed to finance myself because Ukraine stopped supporting me.” In his experience, the costs for a swimmer just to compete at a world-class level—coaches, trainers, recovery modalities, etc.—run to $6,000 a month at minimum. To actually chase a world record? “It’s $10,000 a month, at least.”

In some ways that’s the most appealing part of working with Enhanced…. It’s a job! A normal-ish, dependable job with a monthly paycheck. The perks are pretty good: free housing; nutritious meals; health care, both of the standard doctor-visit variety and the futuristic doping-consultation kind; trainers and world-class coaches; and access to gyms equipped with hyperbaric oxygen chambers and massage therapists. All while being able to focus exclusively on training, the thing you’ve been doing your whole life? What a dream.

And if not this? For swimmers on the other side of 30, the likely career paths are coaching, the seminar circuit, teaching kids. The professional options are somewhat limited, according to Proud, who told me, “I don’t have any degrees. I’m not academic. All I know is swimming.”

So: Ben Proud. The golden boy. As a child he swam mostly for fun. He loved scuba diving, being in the water. His inner life started going sideways when he learned his parents were separating. As a teenager he became your standard-issue rebellious kid, drinking and stealing cigarettes. His transformation into Ben Proud, pride of the UK, began when he was about 15 and showed up to a random swim practice. Only one other kid did too.

He got in the water, anyway, and the coach put him through his paces. After practice the coach told young Ben: “You’ve got some talent here that hasn’t been realized. I think if we work together, we can do something special.”

Proud got serious, started training five, six times a week. Won a few big races locally and then internationally. It certainly helped his confidence that, as “an awkward teenager who was very introverted,” attention started coming his way. The water was a respite from everything else going on in his home life. “It just seemed to come naturally, this ability to swim fast. And along with the tricky household at the time, it was like a bubble. I could dive into and forget about everything else.

“Something about the water was this fantastic feeling, like weightlessness,” he added. “It’s the closest I can make it out to being able to fly. You just jump in, you’re just free.”

The life of a professional athlete is a lonely one. You’re often holed up in strange places: In Proud’s case, that meant living alone in the UK as a teen, then Turkey for seven years in his 20s. Also, a dark but perfectly serviceable suite at a Residence Inn in Las Vegas with a window facing the freeway.

Among the Enhanced swimmers, Proud is the guy whom others seek out for advice when they need to fix something or work out a kink in their stroke. He is meticulous about the details. Nerdy even. For part of his time in Turkey, he trained himself using two GoPros: “I’d set them up at different places, and I would check the exact angle that the hand follows on the frontal plane. You can tell a lot by if there’s any leakage of power, or momentum, or if your arm is deviating at certain places.”

Proud had heard about the Enhanced Games but a turning point occurred on a terrible day for him personally. “It was off the back of a two-hour drug test,” he said. “I woke up, went to the bathroom at 6:30. Then at 7 a.m. the drug testers arrived to take a sample. I had to wait two hours to be able to give it.” After going through the whole process, his girlfriend at the time told him that Gkolomeev had just smashed the 50-meter freestyle world record with Enhanced, a record that Proud had been chasing. “So I’m like: _For fuck’s sake, this day can’t start any worse_.”

He considered staying clean but ultimately made the decision to sign on with Enhanced out of financial consideration: He’s collecting a good monthly salary to do what he loves. When he announced his decision on Instagram to officially sign with Enhanced, it was crossing a Rubicon—there was no turning back. “My body was trembling,” going into the announcement, he said. “The weeks leading up to it were really stressful. I’m the guy who’s always smiling, who’s easygoing, doesn’t create any conflict in the water, who just does my own thing. But this was controversial within swimming news and British news. It was bizarre, like a lot of positive support initially, and then, like the condemnation from British swimming.” _The Daily Mail_ called Proud “Britain’s ‘Drug-Cheat Olympics’ Pariah.” A fan on an Olympics subreddit summed up the general sentiment: “Ben has not made us proud.”

Proud isn’t sure how long he’ll stick with Enhanced, but he sees this as a rare opportunity to set himself up for the future, an opportunity that few swimmers have ever had. His Enhanced earnings could offer some cushion while he figures out the next step—perhaps even allow him to shadow his dad for awhile, learn the ropes of interior design.

Athletes thrive when they’re in a routine. Most of the Enhanced competitors just retreat to their rooms after dinner. To fill his time, Proud reads a lot. Meditates. He plays an online card game called Balatro. He also spends a lot of time tending his spreadsheets. “I actually have this Excel sheet on my laptop where I tried to map out every aspect of what happens during a race, every muscle fiber twitching, everything in the kinetic chain,” he said.

He offered to share them during one of our interviews. We moseyed over to his desk and Proud double-clicked a spreadsheet file that featured multiple tabs with hundreds of color-coded cells, a gobsmacking amount of information and intelligence.

For years he’d been keeping detailed records after every practice, documenting not just his times but the progression of his physiology and body composition. Notes on everything from his hip flexor active range, the amplitude of his kicks, hamstring length, tendon stiffness, thoracic mobility—the list goes on and on. It was a dizzying amount of information, like the Matrix revealing itself in a cascade of green code.

“Yeah,” Proud said sheepishly, “I’ve got a bit of an analytical brain.”

**6\. NEW CHALLENGES**

One of the latest athletes to join training camp number two in Abu Dhabi was Emily Barclay, a 28-year-old swimmer from the UK. She has a background in studying kinesiology and was already working in nearby Dubai as a swim coach when Coach Hawke invited her to join Enhanced as a competitor. She’s undersized for a swimmer but makes up for it with a tenacious rate wall-to-wall. “My last five meters is usually the best part of the race,” she said.

Her room at Erth adjoins Ben Proud’s, which is convenient as they are longtime friends who’ve ended up dating seriously. But most nights they end up sleeping in their own beds, said Proud. “Performance-wise, that’s the best thing.”

Proud said that he was initially concerned about Barclay joining Enhanced. “I was seeing all the red flags, the issues, the fears,” he said, “and I was trying not to lay that on her as well; let her make her own decision. I could see the benefit of being able to travel together—it’d be fantastic. But, yeah, I was concerned. This life, it’s very daunting. You’re at the forefront of the media, and you’re controversial.”

The Games were still set to take place under one fluorescently spectacled roof on May 24. Enhanced had even signed World’s Strongest Man champion Hafþór Júlíus Björnsson, aka The Mountain from _Game of Thrones._ Björnsson wasn’t going to participate in the clinical trial, but he was going to attempt to break his own deadlift world record in a one-off competition against a strongman rival. Proud, meanwhile, is planning to race in both the 50-meter freestyle and butterfly. Everyone up and down the roster was raring to go. Things were changing quickly, but the prize remained the same: $1 million for world records in the showtime events (the 50-meter freestyle and the 100-meter dash in track), $250,000 for other records, and additional cash prizes for top finishes.

Then at the end of February, the missiles started flying overhead.

When President Trump initiated a military operation against Iran, which sits just across the Persian Gulf from the UAE, Abu Dhabi became a target, including its primary airport and a nearby military base that hosts US forces. At night missiles flickered in the dark sky like fireflies. The sound of a rocket interception, Megan Romano thought, wasn’t unlike the boom of a severe thunderstorm back home in Florida, but it was accompanied by shaking walls and windows. For Proud, the atmosphere in Abu Dhabi, with all its uncertainty, recalled the early days of COVID; the athletes were given daily security briefings. But it was the blare of the emergency alerts on their phones that drove everyone batshit. The phones would at times go off in the middle of the night, which is problematic for world-class swimmers whose bodies require an inordinate amount of sleep every night.

Govorov, having experienced the impacts of the war in Ukraine, was a source of calm for his new friends in Enhanced. He told them to keep their passports close, and gave out some cash, just in case. Two of the athletes decided to leave early to train back home, electing to undergo protocols with their own physicians.

Plus, another bombshell: Cameron McEvoy, the reigning Olympic gold medalist in the 50-meter freestyle, posted a new WR in the event at a meet in March. 20.88, no PEDs, no supersuit. A million bucks in May was another hundredth of a second further out of grasp.

This was all happening as a backdrop to the actual enhancement phase, which, after months of waiting, finally started in mid-March. The protocols provided something of a salve. Proud remembers showering the night before his enhancement protocol was supposed to begin, like actually _begin,_ when “it hit me like a train,” he said. “I was like, ‘Shit, this is happening. This is the turning point that I’ve been talking about. That’s the veil that I’m walking through. It’s that big moment which sets me very clearly away from my life that I’ve known for so long.’”

He was administering three different injections. His testosterone levels had nearly tripled, and he felt an eagerness to get in the pool and train. He felt strong. He felt energized. He felt mostly awesome.

Mostly. He found himself with more confidence and with less brain fog, but he noticed that he was susceptible to mood swings. “There is a definite irritability, so the emotions are much higher, which is funny,” he said. This was most evident when you get a bunch of alphas together in the same pool, and it was also something he and Emily tried to be mindful of whenever they found themselves bickering. “It’s like you’re hangry, like you’re waiting for food and it’s not coming” is how he described it.

During one of our final calls prior to the Games, in April, Proud hopped into the chat sporting something new: a thick, handsome mustache. Something he says he’d never been able to grow before. I told him it looked great. He was not sure if this was a side effect of enhancement or not.

The facial hair was mostly a joke, at least at first, and he said he was going to keep it for a bit. To my mind it’s a pretty compelling visual metaphor: a severance of the old, natty Ben, and the introduction of a new, almost Waluigi version of him—a bolder, faster, slightly bizzaro but nevertheless futuristic category of professional athlete. Someone who’s able to do what he loves at a high level, for just a little bit longer. He’s crossed into an event horizon and is now fully swimming into the unknown.

“I’ve always been very scared about my facial hair because I can’t really grow any,” Enhanced Ben admitted. “I’d like to think it’s having some effect on me, and maybe my confidence, to be like, ‘You know what? Fuck it. Let’s just see.’ ”

Chris Gayomali _is a journalist based in New York City. A former_ GQ _editor, he writes the health-and-wellness newsletter_ Heavies _and is the editor of_ Ssense.

_A version of this story appears in the Summer 2026 issue with the title “On Your Mark, Get Set, Dope!”_

**PRODUCTION CREDITS:** 
_Photographs by **Olivia Arthur / Magnum Photos**_
