Four days before I went to northern Sweden to meet Lorenzo Bertelli, Prada Group chief marketing officer and son of Prada co–creative director Miuccia Prada and Prada Group board chairman Patrizio Bertelli, the Prada Group announced it was hiring Pieter Mulier from Alaïa as Versace’s new chief creative officer. It was a bold move to hire the Belgian Mulier for a brand steeped in Italian DNA, signaling that, less than a year into acquiring Versace, Prada was not afraid of change. For his part, the heir apparent for CEO calls it “an instinctive decision,” but here in Umeå he has other things on his mind: He is preparing for a race, Rally Sweden.

Before he joined the family business in 2017, Lorenzo was a professional race car driver with not a lot of real fashion industry experience. He looks exactly like how you’d imagine an Italian playboy looks, with tufts of gray in his thick, wavy hair and a strong nose like his mother’s. He rides around his native Milan on a scooter and speaks English at a rapid clip, with luxuriously rolled _r_’s. He could have embarrassed the family with rakish antics or, once he made the leap into corporate life, been dismissed as a case of nepotism. But he turned out to be something else: really good at his jobs.

This morning he’s taken just one business call, hopefully his last before race day, so he can focus. He’s done this Swedish rally eight times. “It’s fast because it has fewer corners and wider roads. Going the average speed is the same as a German highway, but in the countryside with ice.” Outside, the twinkling college town is divided by a frozen river. It’s so far north that sunset starts around 3:30 p.m., and everyone has apps to tell you if you can see the Northern Lights. We spend the day drinking coffee in a wood-paneled room, driving into the nearby wilderness, and walking in single-digit weather to see the country roads lined with pine trees where he is preparing to race. He tells me that he is not racing in an attempt to finish first. “Winning is impossible, I didn’t race for the last two years, I’m being realistic. It’s a detox from everyday stuff.”

The everyday stuff includes much curiosity about the decision to acquire Versace, the high-profile departure of Dario Vitale there, and how Mulier came to be chosen as his replacement. The acquisition is seen as a move toward making the Prada Group larger to compete with the likes of the French conglomerates. Investors and analysts bring them ideas all the time. “They drop them on the table, see how we react, blah blah blah. The brands that are still not owned by Kering or LVMH that are meaningful in fashion. If we see the right opportunity, we look at it, otherwise, no,” Bertelli says. I ask what sort of ideas. “Whatever you can imagine.” He’s being so deliberately vague that I ask the first and maybe strangest idea that comes to my head. A theme park? (Anyone who has visited a Prada café knows a Prada theme park would be a dream.) “Um, no, \[but\] always in our sector.”

What is Going on at Versace?

But then he also denies trying to mold Prada Group after the two French fashion conglomerates, contradicting himself a bit. “I don’t have an objective to be as big as Kering or LVMH. It’s to be successful at what we do. Growth is fundamental—if you don’t have growth, you cannot execute nice things. Simple as that.”

Versace was not a case of buying for the sake of it, but an opportunity to acquire a fashion house that is meaningful, doesn’t fight for the same customers Prada already has, and was the right price. “The brand is much bigger than the business. It’s a huge, incredible story, and the potential is so much bigger than the revenue that they are doing,” he says. Versace, which was previously owned by the multinational company Capri Holdings, which owns Michael Kors, is now back in the hands of Italians at a time when two great Italian designers—Giorgio Armani and ­Valentino Garavani—have died in the last year. Bertelli doesn’t want to reinvent the wheel. “Sometimes,” he says, “a good dish needs just a bit of salt.”

Vitale, who was Versace’s creative director for a single, critically beloved spring 2026 collection, was not unknown to the Prada Group, as he had been at Miu Miu for more than 14 years. His departure from Miu Miu in January 2025 was perhaps seen as less than loyal. And the new owners wanted their own pick of creative director. “The stories that are around are quite public,” Bertelli says. “Even before Dario left \[Miu Miu\], we tried to somehow communicate to him to wait three or four months, to see where it could have ended up. He’s ambitious. He made up his mind, there was nothing to do to stop him. I think at the end it was a successful journey for him.”

Bad news and letting employees go is part of the job. “It’s just business. It’s much more difficult to talk about employees that are lower level in the organization of people. The biggest responsibility we have is the family of those thousands of people. But those managers on top, they will find another job.”

When it was time to pick a successor, Prada Group’s inner circle, including Bertelli and his parents, brainstormed, they looked at past shows, they talked to people close to Mulier. They talked to Donatella Versace, though Bertelli makes sure to note, “She was not involved with the choice.” Nor was Prada’s co–creative director Raf Simons, though he had previously worked with Mulier at Calvin Klein. What they wanted was someone with a clear idea of what Versace of today should look like and how to play with the boundaries of the identity of the brand. Bertelli finds rote sexuality, a flavor Versace is known for, “a bit reductive.” But he was attracted to the way Mulier played with sexiness at Alaïa. “One of the reasons we chose him was because he knows how to work with the shapes of the body. You also need someone who can make a sellable product that people like to wear,” Bertelli says, referring to Mulier’s success with Alaïa ballet flats and its oblong Le Teckel bag. Mulier starts in July, and his first show, his menswear collection, will be presented in January. “We need to be strategic with what kind of message we want to give people,” Bertelli says.

Prada’s rise from small-time leather goods company to global recognition roughly followed Bertelli’s childhood—he was born in 1988, and his mother showed her first women’s ready-to-wear collection that year. Today, Prada Group is not just Prada and Miu Miu, but shoe companies Church’s and Car Shoe, the sailing syndicate Luna Rossa, and most recently Versace, which it acquired for around $1.4 billion in December. It also includes the Milan pastry shop Marchesi 1824, from which there is an array of cornettos on offer at the company’s offices in Milan, just next to its modern art museum, Fondazione Prada.

_Vanity Fair_’s Sports Coverage Throughout the Years

When he was in grade school, Bertelli remembers carrying a Prada nylon backpack with a mix of colors on it, much to his chagrin. “I wanted the same backpack as everyone, the Eastpack, the Invicta,” he says. He attended public schools his whole life, but people still knew who he was. “It was not so easy. But I mean, it is what it is. There was a perception of me before even knowing me. You have to learn how to cope with that and stay with your real friends. I learned very quickly who to trust and who not to trust,” he says. He’s well aware of current discourse around privilege. “You have advantages, you have pressure, especially when you’re a kid so very young. The problem is how you manage it.”

Despite his parents having what he calls “just the right amount of strictness,” he didn’t always study, to the extent that he didn’t pass his first year of secondary school when he was a teenager, roughly the equivalent of flunking freshman year of high school. “Failed, it sounds very harsh in English,” he notes with a grimace. He repeated the year, got serious, and studied philosophy at Vita-Salute San Raffaele University in Milan. He maintains a preference for Kant, Plato, and Nietzsche. He interned in New York at _Interview_ magazine. “Packing boxes, mostly,” he says.

He never assumed he would join Prada Group. He has never been a fashion person. He doesn’t live to dress himself. “I like clothes, but I’m very practical and sometimes I don’t have the time to care too much about it.” He thinks of himself as casual. As casually dressed as someone who wears Prada almost exclusively can be. His younger brother, Giulio, is directing films and has no plans to join him in the family business. “My parents always told me and my brother, do whatever you want,” Bertelli says. For the first part of his life, that was rally, where teams race cars not on tracks but twisty, small roads on terrain like gravel and snow. His father, Patrizio, is a car collector, but Lorenzo was initially more into motorbikes. He played soccer and ice hockey. He started driving at 16 despite the fact that the legal driving age in Italy for cars is 18. “In the countryside,” he protests. “Racing was a thing in the ’90s in Europe, and I grew up with the legends of Subaru and Audi.”

His first major race was in 2011 at the ​​Rally Italia Sardegna. It’s a race, with cars going 80 to 90 mph, but it’s also a sport of endurance. “It’s psychological because you’re in the car for an entire day, dealing with ups and downs of adrenaline.” There is a team made up of drivers from all over the world, speaking English, but that may be their second or third language. Clear communication about conditions like a puddle or a sharp turn was key. “All the stupid, banal issues of your life go out the window when you put on your helmet,” he says. When the races were over, he would read or sometimes do magic tricks with cards to decompress. (A strain of the theatrical runs in the family: Miuccia once trained as a mime.)

“In the beginning, I did it for fun, like everything should be, and then it became serious,” says Bertelli. But to be serious about being a professional rally driver meant being away from home about 200 days a year, waking up at 5 a.m. and going to sleep late. “I stopped when I was still improving, but being in the top 10 rally drivers in the world is quite remarkable.” He decided to stop the World Rally Championship tour. The last race before retirement from full-time racing was at Rally Argentina in 2017. His father came, as well as his closest friends from growing up—some of whom work in finance, medicine, and for a metal foundry—and they’d grill chorizo sausages on the side of the road and cheer him on.

He was relieved to spend more time in Milan, a city he describes as “a metropolis, but of human dimension.” He’s a bit cagey, or rather, unspecific about what exactly he does in his spare time beyond spending it with friends and family, or really anything about his life outside of work. He will say that somewhere toward the end of his professional racing career, he fell in love. He met Elena Basile at an after-party a decade ago. He calls her his other half. She has worked for the eyewear brand Luxottica, but she’s a civilian. “Sometimes she comes to the show with me, so sometimes people take pictures with her, but we do our own normal lives outside of the business. Red carpets are only when I have to.” They are engaged, but they don’t have any plans for a wedding. “Maybe one day. The real marriage is starting a family. Marriage, engagement, I don’t even find the difference. It doesn’t exist.” Their daughter was born in 2023. As for growing up Prada, he is figuring out how to tell her about his experience. “There will be plenty of time,” he says. He’s more focused on the small milestones, like when she’ll be old enough to learn to ice-skate.

The Nightlife That Builds Empires: From Salvador Dali to Gianni Versace

I ask him what it is like to suddenly work with his parents. “How you can imagine,” he says with a sardonic note in his voice and running a hand through his hair. “Situations come up with business, family, and private life, and you make sure to keep the business outside, but sometimes, of course, you have a contamination of the two.” So what does he call his mother in meetings: Mama, Miuccia, Mrs. Prada? Or his dad? “I just don’t call them by their names.” He shrugs.

One of his first initiatives was the Re-Nylon campaign, replacing the kind of signature Prada nylon that was used in his childhood backpack with recycled ocean and fiber waste and fishing nets, often replicating cult bags from their early years, bringing in young customers. It’s part of what pushed Prada toward double-digit growth from 2021 to 2024, and 9 percent growth in 2025.

But the transition to working for the Prada Group wasn’t entirely seamless. The pressure was easy enough to manage, because for him, being a professional athlete was all about understanding how to cope with pressure. The problem was the new normal of having a steady life. “I had a period that was very difficult for me when I stopped driving because I suddenly found out I was missing my adrenaline and actually became kind of a drag.”

There is plenty of adrenaline to mine on growing the family business, a public company that has a market capitalization of approximately $12.5 billion. Bertelli has been a member of the board of directors since 2021. How he wants to define Prada for the future is a huge task. “I think Prada stands for culture, and culture is such an important driver because it’s the tool that allows you to understand present times. Prada could be a political party. There are ideas behind it,” he says with a smile and adds, “That would be a stupid move. I could be as good as possible, but there are plenty of people who are going to say I’m rich and blah blah, fashion. I think it would not be credible at all, so it’s just a joke.”

Bertelli has had some form of public identity his whole life. He’s used to it, but it doesn’t mean he relishes it, he tells me when we first meet in January at Prada headquarters, a rambling former gin distillery transformed by the architect Rem Koolhaas into an industrial-style corporate campus. We’re in a conference room where he’s picking at a cornetto from Marchesi. His own modest office is just off the bullpen of the massive communications department, where the hum of seemingly hundreds of employees can be heard on the phone all day, but he seems to find all the action motivating rather than a distraction.

The men’s fall 2026 runway show had been the day before and memorably highlighted lived-in, imperfect details such as frayed cuffs and faded fabrics, making a statement about the humanness of clothes as they touch the body and wear with time. “Carrying impressions of life, they underscore the significance of duration. To remember is a sign of respect,” wrote Miuccia and Simons in the show’s press release.

Bertelli does not design the clothes, but he attends all the Prada shows. He doesn’t watch from backstage but rather sits front and center. A month after I spoke to him, this time at the women’s fall 2026 show, he was seated next to Meta’s Mark Zuckerberg and his wife, Priscilla Chan. “Of course, that’s part of my job, if I like it or not.”

How they message their power, and their allegiances and affiliations, has become a mainstream conversation. Bertelli and his family have built extraordinary wealth and influence with Prada, but they have chosen to position themselves in a different way from their cohort of fellow billionaires. For example, members of the family that owns LVMH, Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk, and Zuckerberg all attended the January 2025 inauguration of Donald Trump. Were you invited, or would you ever go to something like that? I ask. “No, I was not invited, of course, but I don’t think so. Honestly, politics is a double-sided blade. What I learned is not to get too involved. I think that is maybe the reason why we have not gone there. Not because either \[president-elect\] was a Democrat or a Republican,” he says.

Bertelli describes himself as center-left politically. “At a certain point, enough money is enough,” he says, which is a very different ethos than the ceaseless accumulation of wealth that so many bold-name billionaires of this era ascribe to. “I think today’s biggest problem in the West is inequality, and for me—someone that owns much more than others—giving very close to half your income to other people for me is fine, even if it’s a lot.”

The manner in which he talks about capitalism versus politics shows shades of his degree in philosophy. It’s theoretical. Capitalism, in Bertelli’s view, is about rapid growth. The job of politics is to regulate, or as he puts it, “to preserve the balance of the ecosystem.” In other words, it needs to happen, but it’s not the role of the private sector to do so. Similarly, he thinks technology needs to be regulated. “A weapon is a technology that has to be regulated. AI is technology that has to be regulated. Social networks are a technology that we’ve seen that now are more regulated compared to the past,” he says. “But politics is too slow in policing because the private sector grows faster, but the important thing is, at the end, the policies matter. Maybe we go too far on the policies in Europe. A society cannot be judged by just his capability of growing in terms of GDP. It’s about the quality of life, simple as that.”

Back in Umeå, I want to see if he will make good on his promise in Milan to perform a card trick for me. It is a silly and slightly eccentric skill for a fashion executive to have, let alone doing it in a tent where the rally teams were beginning to set up. We are surrounded by piles of wheels and people in giant parkas stopping to greet Bertelli after his absence from the racing scene. Before I leave him with his team, I ask him if he remembered his cards. He did and asks me to take one from his deck. I grab an eight of spades and, as instructed, don’t show it to him. He shuffles the deck, shows me a card. Is this it? No, I say. And it’s not this one? No. It’s this one? It is. I yelp in excitement. He isn’t done. He has me put it randomly back in the deck. He shows me the deck to prove that it doesn’t have anything sticky or rigged. “Opa,” he says with a flourish, and flips over the top card. It is mine, the eight of spades. He looks delighted. This is a man who is trying to pull off a lot of things at once and can still make time for a little flourish of humanity.

**Produced on location by Skarp Projects. For details, go to VF.com/credits.**

_CORRECTIONS: An earlier version of this story misidentified a person in the 1997 photo at the family villa in Milan. Additionally, it incorrectly identified the location of the 2025 photo of Bertelli with his mother and father. That photo was taken in Rome._

## More Great Stories From _Vanity Fair_

* The 15 Films We Can’t Wait to See at the Cannes Film Festival
 
* The 16 Best-Dressed Stars at the 2026 Met Gala
 
* The 38 Most On-Theme Looks at the Met Gala
 
* See All the Looks From the 2026 Met Gala Red Carpet
 
* All the Highlights From the 2026 Met Gala
 
* Roger Goodell’s Hollywood Blitz: Why All the Other Moguls Have to Kiss the Ring
 
* Inside the Enhanced Games—Where Athletes Biohack Their Way to Glory
 
* Trinidad Chambliss on Why He’s Doing Battle With the NCAA
 
* Why Is Janet Jackson Missing From _Michael?_
 
* From the Archive: Checking In on the Gettys
